Rebuild the active Drive screen to closely match the attached reference image while preserving the existing DriveOS architecture, tracking logic, API integration, location permissions and journey persistence.

This screen must support two different active-drive states:

1. Navigation mode
The user has selected a destination and started navigation.

2. Free drive tracking mode
The user has started recording a drive without selecting a destination.

Overall layout

Create a full-screen driving interface with the map occupying most of the screen.

Remove the normal app header and bottom navigation while a drive is active. Do not show:

Hamburger menu
DriveOS logo
Notifications button
Profile button
Standard bottom tab bar
Search bar
Home, Work, Favourites or Recent shortcuts

The active-drive screen should be focused entirely on information that is useful while driving.

Use the existing light DriveOS aesthetic:

Bright Apple Maps background
White translucent cards
Soft shadows
Rounded corners
Black primary text
Grey secondary text
DriveOS orange for active actions and recording status
Blue for navigation routes and navigation-related information

Respect the iPhone safe areas and ensure nothing overlaps the status bar, Dynamic Island or home indicator.

Map behaviour

The map must remain the primary element and occupy roughly the top 65–70% of the display.

During an active drive:

Continuously update the vehicle position using live GPS.
Smoothly animate the vehicle marker instead of making it jump between updates.
Keep the vehicle centred horizontally.
Use a forward-looking camera position so more map is visible ahead of the vehicle.
Rotate the map based on the user’s direction of travel when heading data is reliable.
Do not constantly reset the camera if the user manually pans the map.
When the user manually pans, temporarily disable follow mode.
Show a recenter button that returns the camera to the vehicle and resumes follow mode.

Use the existing vehicle marker or car icon, but refine it so it remains clearly visible against the map.

Navigation mode

When the active journey has a destination and route:

Display the calculated route as a clear blue line.
Keep the remaining route visible ahead of the vehicle.
Show a centred navigation instruction card near the top of the screen, underneath the iOS status bar.
The navigation card should include:
Manoeuvre icon
Distance to manoeuvre
Instruction text
Road name
Optional progress indicator
Example:
Right-turn icon
250 m
Turn right onto
Hawthorn Drive
Update the instruction card as manoeuvres change.
Hide the instruction card when no valid instruction is available.
Show the current road name where appropriate.
Show the current detected speed limit when available.
Navigation units must respect the user’s selected unit system.

Do not add fake navigation data. Use the current route and navigation state already available in the app.

Free drive tracking mode

When the user starts a drive without a destination:

Do not show the navigation instruction card.
Do not show a blue route line.
Keep the vehicle positioned approximately in the centre of the usable map area.
Draw a continuous orange trail behind the vehicle showing the exact path already travelled.
The orange trail must be built from the recorded journey route points.
Extend the trail smoothly as new GPS points are received.
Do not draw a projected route ahead of the vehicle.
Preserve the trail throughout the active journey.
Save the same route-point data used by the trail so the completed journey can later be shown in Journey History.
Avoid visibly drawing inaccurate GPS spikes. Ignore or filter clearly invalid location points where practical.

The experience should feel like the app is recording the user’s real-world driving line in real time.

Top status cards

In the upper-left area, show a compact status card:

Green status dot
Drive in progress
Current duration underneath

In the upper-right area, show a compact GPS status card:

GPS icon
Signal state such as Strong, Moderate, Weak or Searching
Small signal indicator

These cards must be compact and should not obstruct important map information.

Drive telemetry panel

Add a fixed telemetry panel at the bottom of the screen, above the home indicator.

The panel should use a white translucent background with rounded upper corners and a subtle shadow.

The centre of the panel should contain a large speed display. It may use a simple circular speedometer presentation like the reference image, but the digital current speed must remain the easiest value to read.

Display:

Current speed
Total distance
Average speed
Top speed
Drive duration

Layout:

Large current speed in the centre
Distance and average speed on the left
Top speed and duration on the right

Current speed should be visually dominant and readable at a glance.

Use the user’s selected units:

Imperial: mph and miles
Metric: km/h and kilometres

Never display negative speed. Clamp invalid or negative GPS speed values to zero.

Calculate:

Current speed from the latest reliable location update
Total distance from the recorded route
Average speed using total moving distance and elapsed drive time, using the project’s existing definition consistently
Top speed as the highest reliable speed recorded during the current drive
Duration from the active journey start time

All values must update live without excessive re-rendering or map stuttering.

Controls

Place three controls along the bottom of the telemetry panel:

Pause
End Drive
Save Point

End Drive should be the primary control and use DriveOS orange.

Pause behaviour:

Pause journey tracking without ending the journey.
Stop accumulating distance while paused.
Clearly change the UI to show that the drive is paused.
Allow the user to resume.

End Drive behaviour:

Require confirmation to prevent accidental taps while driving.
Finalise the journey.
Save duration, distance, average speed, top speed and route points.
Return the user to the appropriate journey summary screen.

Save Point behaviour:

Save the current coordinate as a temporary journey marker.
Include the current timestamp.
Provide brief visual confirmation.
Do not interrupt the active drive.

Buttons must have large touch targets suitable for use in a mounted phone.

Data and state requirements

Continue using the existing active-journey state and API-backed journey system.

Do not create a second, disconnected drive-tracking implementation.

Use a single source of truth for:

Active journey
Journey start time
Pause state
Location points
Current speed
Top speed
Distance
Navigation route
Navigation instructions

The orange tracking trail and completed journey route must use the same recorded route-point data.

Navigation mode and free tracking mode should use the same screen component, with conditional UI based on whether an active destination and route exist.

Suggested state:

type ActiveDriveMode = "navigation" | "tracking";

Determine the mode from the active journey rather than relying only on temporary screen state.

Performance and safety
Keep map animation smooth during frequent GPS updates.
Avoid updating the full component tree every second unnecessarily.
Memoise expensive map overlays and telemetry calculations where appropriate.
Do not request location permission repeatedly.
Continue tracking correctly when the app briefly enters the background, within the permissions and capabilities already configured.
Prevent the phone from sleeping while an active drive is running, if supported by the existing Expo setup.
Keep text large and high contrast.
Avoid small controls, dense menus or unnecessary interaction.
Important constraints
Match the attached reference image closely in hierarchy, spacing and overall visual quality.
Do not simply place the existing small drive card over the current home map.
Build a dedicated active-drive layout.
Preserve all existing working journey recording and database behaviour.
Do not replace real map, route or GPS data with mocked values.
Do not break the normal non-driving Map screen.
The standard app navigation should return after the drive ends.

After implementation, provide a clear summary of:

Files changed
How navigation mode is detected
How free-drive mode is detected
How the blue navigation route is rendered
How the orange recorded trail is rendered
How telemetry values are calculated
How pause and resume work
Any database or API changes made